# HoloGestures
A Comparsion of Two-Handed Gestures on the Hololens

## Abstract
Motivated by [previous work](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7892383/) in the Four Eyes Lab at University of California, Santa Barbara of using augmented reality to annotate real world objects, we wanted to develop an environment for using two-handed gestures to manipulate these holographic annotations through rotation and re-size gestures. The Microsoft Hololens currently only hosts one-handed gestures - which we feel are limited in their ability to interact with objects, and seems to discourage two-handed gestures on their [developer forums](https://forums.hololens.com/discussion/1613/two-hands-gesture). We sought to explore this design space, with the intention that dedicating two-handed gestures to rotation and scaling manipulations allows for the possibility of reserving one handed interactions to drawing annotations.

We have developed four different techniques for two-handed manipulation gestures on the Microsoft Hololens. To evaluate our techniques, we led a study with 38 users comparing our techniques to the current one-handed mode of object manipulation present on the Hololens. Each user cycled through a training and testing period on each technique. We recorded multiple performance metrics for each user on each technique, as well as their preferences. Results indicate that certain two-handed techniques perform comparatively to one-handed techniques in terms of accuracy and time, and in one instance gain the majority of user preference, showing that an environment for two-handed interactions on the Hololens is justified and possible.

## Introduction
Augmented Reality is well designed for creating annotations of real word objects. The Microsoft Hololens is a device well suited to this task as it offers head and hand tracking, as well as room spatial-mapping. [Previous work exists](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7893337/) for finding the most accurate and preferred methods for creating one-handed annotation on the Hololens.  If one wanted to change the orientation or size of an annotation to eliminate the need to redraw the annotation, the question arises of what would be the best method for doing so. Furthermore, if one hand is dedicated to drawing annotations, the addition of one-handed re-size and rotation gestures would require some method for switching between an annotation-drawing and annotation-manipulation modes. Alternatively, two hands could be used for spatial manipulation tasks, and one hand could be reserved for drawing annotations. The Microsoft Hololens currently only hosts one-handed gestures, discourages the development of two-handed gestures on their [developer forums](https://forums.hololens.com/discussion/1613/two-hands-gesture). This work attempts to explore the feasibility as well as justification of developing two-handed gestures on the Hololens contributing four different environments for manipulating drawn annotations using two-handed gestures and comparing them to the current one-handed method on the Hololens. 

In choosing the best two handed interactions, we wanted to explore the design space between both 6Degrees of Freedom (DOF), as well as DOF separation for spatial manipulation tasks. Some research praises higher degrees of freedom in performing object manipulation tasks [Feng2015](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2788940.2788942), [Cho2015](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7131738/). [Mendes](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2993396), however, found that DOF separation actually leads to improved results for accurately placing an object in a virtual environment. Mendes also found that although full DOF separation led to higher precision in object manipulation tasks, it also led to longer completion times.

To evaluate the design space of two-handed interactions on the Hololens, we led a within-subjects user study with 38 participants comparing the time and accuracy of performing each gesture to complete tasks. As a baseline comparison, we also implemented the one-handed Microsoft Wireframe Cube technique currently present on the Hololens. The current state of the Wireframe Cube technique only allows for rotation along one axis (yaw), thus in order to make a fair comparison between this technique and the other two-handed techniques, we modified the Wireframe Cube and added the possibility for rotation about all axis. In our results, we found that the Wireframe Cube performed more accurately than the other techniques (by a small margin), and that there wasn't a significant difference in timing between the top techniques. One two-handed technique, the "Hands Locking into Gesture" technique was preferred highest by users compared to all other techniques, and also ranked comparitively to the Wireframe Cube technique in terms of performance. Our results indicate that the possibility for a two-handed interface on the Hololens is not only feasible, but also justified according to user feedback and performance.
